0 http://www.gutenberg.net/Hugo/LesMs/0.html
please take a look at the important information in this header we encourage you to keep this file on your own disk keeping an electronic path open for the next readers do not remove this welcome to th

1 http://www.gutenberg.net/Hugo/LesMs/1.html
chapter i m myriel ii m myriel becomes m welcome iii a hard bishopric for a good bishop iv works corresponding to words v monseigneur bienvenu made his cassocks last too long vi who guarded his house 

2 http://www.gutenberg.net/Hugo/LesMs/2.html
chapter i what is met with on the way from nivelles ii hougomont iii the eighteenth of june 1815 iv a v the quid obscurum of battles vi four oclock in the afternoon vii napoleon in a good humor viii t

3 http://www.gutenberg.net/Hugo/LesMs/3.html
chapter i m myriel in 1815 m charles francois bienvenu myriel was bishop of d he was an old man of about seventy five years of age he had occupied the see of d since 1806 although this detail has no c

4 http://www.gutenberg.net/Hugo/LesMs/4.html
chapter ii m myriel becomes m welcome the episcopal palace of d adjoins the hospital the episcopal palace was a huge and beautiful house built of stone at the beginning of the last century by m henri 

5 http://www.gutenberg.net/Hugo/LesMs/5.html
chapter iii a hard bishopric for a good bishop the bishop did not omit his pastoral visits because he had converted his carriage into alms the diocese of d is a fatiguing one there are very few plains

6 http://www.gutenberg.net/Hugo/LesMs/6.html
chapter iv works corresponding to words his conversation was gay and affable he put himself on a level with the two old women who had passed their lives beside him when he laughed it was the laugh of 

7 http://www.gutenberg.net/Hugo/LesMs/7.html
chapter v monseigneur bienvenu made his cassocks last too long the private life of m myriel was filled with the same thoughts as his public life the voluntary poverty in which the bishop of d lived wo

8 http://www.gutenberg.net/Hugo/LesMs/8.html
chapter vi who guarded his house for him the house in which he lived consisted as we have said of a ground floor and one story above three rooms on the ground floor three chambers on the first and an 

9 http://www.gutenberg.net/Hugo/LesMs/9.html
chapter vii cravatte it is here that a fact falls naturally into place which we must not omit because it is one of the sort which show us best what sort of a man the bishop of d was after the destruct

10 http://www.gutenberg.net/Hugo/LesMs/10.html
chapter viii philosophy after drinking the senator above mentioned was a clever man who had made his own way heedless of those things which present obstacles and which are called conscience sworn fait

11 http://www.gutenberg.net/Hugo/LesMs/11.html
chapter ix the brother as depicted by the sister in order to furnish an idea of the private establishment of the bishop of d and of the manner in which those two sainted women subordinated their actio

12 http://www.gutenberg.net/Hugo/LesMs/12.html
chapter x the bishop in the presence of an unknown light at an epoch a little later than the date of the letter cited in the preceding pages he did a thing which if the whole town was to be believed w

13 http://www.gutenberg.net/Hugo/LesMs/13.html
chapter xi a restriction we should incur a great risk of deceiving ourselves were we to conclude from this that monseigneur welcome was a philosophical bishop or a patriotic cure his meeting which may

14 http://www.gutenberg.net/Hugo/LesMs/14.html
chapter xii the solitude of monseigneur welcome a bishop is almost always surrounded by a full squadron of little abbes just as a general is by a covey of young officers this is what that charming sai

15 http://www.gutenberg.net/Hugo/LesMs/15.html
chapter xiii what he believed we are not obliged to sound the bishop of d on the score of orthodoxy in the presence of such a soul we feel ourselves in no mood but respect the conscience of the just m

16 http://www.gutenberg.net/Hugo/LesMs/16.html
chapter xiv what he thought one last word since this sort of details might particularly at the present moment and to use an expression now in fashion give to the bishop of d a certain pantheistical ph

17 http://www.gutenberg.net/Hugo/LesMs/17.html
chapter i the evening of a day of walking early in the month of october 1815 about an hour before sunset a man who was travelling on foot entered the little town of d the few inhabitants who were at t

18 http://www.gutenberg.net/Hugo/LesMs/18.html
chapter ii prudence counselled to wisdom that evening the bishop of d after his promenade through the town remained shut up rather late in his room he was busy over a great work on duties which was ne

19 http://www.gutenberg.net/Hugo/LesMs/19.html
chapter iii the heroism of passive obedience the door opened it opened wide with a rapid movement as though some one had given it an energetic and resolute push a man entered we already know the man i

20 http://www.gutenberg.net/Hugo/LesMs/20.html
chapter iv details concerning the cheese dairies of pontarlier now in order to convey an idea of what passed at that table we cannot do better than to transcribe here a passage from one of mademoisell

21 http://www.gutenberg.net/Hugo/LesMs/21.html
chapter v tranquillity after bidding his sister good night monseigneur bienvenu took one of the two silver candlesticks from the table handed the other to his guest and said to him monsieur i will con

22 http://www.gutenberg.net/Hugo/LesMs/22.html
chapter vi jean valjean towards the middle of the night jean valjean woke jean valjean came from a poor peasant family of brie he had not learned to read in his childhood when he reached mans estate b

23 http://www.gutenberg.net/Hugo/LesMs/23.html
chapter vii the interior of despair let us try to say it it is necessary that society should look at these things because it is itself which creates them he was as we have said an ignorant man but he 

24 http://www.gutenberg.net/Hugo/LesMs/24.html
chapter viii billows and shadows a man overboard what matters it the vessel does not halt the wind blows that sombre ship has a path which it is forced to pursue it passes on the man disappears then r

25 http://www.gutenberg.net/Hugo/LesMs/25.html
chapter ix new troubles when the hour came for him to take his departure from the galleys when jean valjean heard in his ear the strange words thou art free the moment seemed improbable and unpreceden

26 http://www.gutenberg.net/Hugo/LesMs/26.html
chapter x the man aroused as the cathedral clock struck two in the morning jean valjean awoke what woke him was that his bed was too good it was nearly twenty years since he had slept in a bed and alt

27 http://www.gutenberg.net/Hugo/LesMs/27.html
chapter xi what he does jean valjean listened not a sound he gave the door a push he pushed it gently with the tip of his finger lightly with the furtive and uneasy gentleness of a cat which is desiro

28 http://www.gutenberg.net/Hugo/LesMs/28.html
chapter xii the bishop works the next morning at sunrise monseigneur bienvenu was strolling in his garden madame magloire ran up to him in utter consternation monseigneur monseigneur she exclaimed doe

29 http://www.gutenberg.net/Hugo/LesMs/29.html
chapter xiii little gervais jean valjean left the town as though he were fleeing from it he set out at a very hasty pace through the fields taking whatever roads and paths presented themselves to him 

30 http://www.gutenberg.net/Hugo/LesMs/30.html
chapter i the year 1817 1817 is the year which louis xviii with a certain royal assurance which was not wanting in pride entitled the twenty second of his reign it is the year in which m bruguiere de 

31 http://www.gutenberg.net/Hugo/LesMs/31.html
chapter ii a double quartette these parisians came one from toulouse another from limoges the third from cahors and the fourth from montauban but they were students and when one says student one says 

32 http://www.gutenberg.net/Hugo/LesMs/32.html
chapter iii four and four it is hard nowadays to picture to ones self what a pleasure trip of students and grisettes to the country was like forty five years ago the suburbs of paris are no longer the

33 http://www.gutenberg.net/Hugo/LesMs/33.html
chapter iv tholomyes is so merry that he sings a spanish ditty that day was composed of dawn from one end to the other all nature seemed to be having a holiday and to be laughing the flower beds of sa

34 http://www.gutenberg.net/Hugo/LesMs/34.html
chapter v at bombardas the russian mountains having been exhausted they began to think about dinner and the radiant party of eight somewhat weary at last became stranded in bombardas public house a br

35 http://www.gutenberg.net/Hugo/LesMs/35.html
chapter vi a chapter in which they adore each other chat at table the chat of love it is as impossible to reproduce one as the other the chat of love is a cloud the chat at table is smoke fameuil and 

36 http://www.gutenberg.net/Hugo/LesMs/36.html
chapter vii the wisdom of tholomyes in the meantime while some sang the rest talked together tumultuously all at once it was no longer anything but noise tholomyes intervened let us not talk at random

37 http://www.gutenberg.net/Hugo/LesMs/37.html
chapter viii the death of a horse the dinners are better at edons than at bombardas exclaimed zephine i prefer bombarda to edon declared blachevelle there is more luxury it is more asiatic look at the

38 http://www.gutenberg.net/Hugo/LesMs/38.html
chapter ix a merry end to mirth when the young girls were left alone they leaned two by two on the window sills chatting craning out their heads and talking from one window to the other they saw the y

39 http://www.gutenberg.net/Hugo/LesMs/39.html
chapter i one mother meets another mother there was at montfermeil near paris during the first quarter of this century a sort of cook shop which no longer exists this cook shop was kept by some people

40 http://www.gutenberg.net/Hugo/LesMs/40.html
chapter ii first sketch of two unprepossessing figures the mouse which had been caught was a pitiful specimen but the cat rejoices even over a lean mouse who were these thenardiers let us say a word o

41 http://www.gutenberg.net/Hugo/LesMs/41.html
chapter iii the lark it is not all in all sufficient to be wicked in order to prosper the cook shop was in a bad way thanks to the travellers fifty seven francs thenardier had been able to avoid a pro

42 http://www.gutenberg.net/Hugo/LesMs/42.html
chapter i the history of a progress in black glass trinkets and in the meantime what had become of that mother who according to the people at montfermeil seemed to have abandoned her child where was s

43 http://www.gutenberg.net/Hugo/LesMs/43.html
chapter ii madeleine he was a man about fifty years of age who had a preoccupied air and who was good that was all that could be said about him thanks to the rapid progress of the industry which he ha

44 http://www.gutenberg.net/Hugo/LesMs/44.html
chapter iii sums deposited with laffitte on the other hand he remained as simple as on the first day he had gray hair a serious eye the sunburned complexion of a laborer the thoughtful visage of a phi

45 http://www.gutenberg.net/Hugo/LesMs/45.html
chapter iv m madeleine in mourning at the beginning of 1820 the newspapers announced the death of m myriel bishop of d surnamed monseigneur bienvenu who had died in the odor of sanctity at the age of 

46 http://www.gutenberg.net/Hugo/LesMs/46.html
chapter v vague flashes on the horizon little by little and in the course of time all this opposition subsided there had at first been exercised against m madeleine in virtue of a sort of law which al

47 http://www.gutenberg.net/Hugo/LesMs/47.html
chapter vi father fauchelevent one morning m madeleine was passing through an unpaved alley of m sur m he heard a noise and saw a group some distance away he approached an old man named father fauchel

48 http://www.gutenberg.net/Hugo/LesMs/48.html
chapter vii fauchelevent becomes a gardener in paris fauchelevent had dislocated his kneepan in his fall father madeleine had him conveyed to an infirmary which he had established for his workmen in t

49 http://www.gutenberg.net/Hugo/LesMs/49.html
chapter viii madame victurnien expends thirty francs on morality when fantine saw that she was making her living she felt joyful for a moment to live honestly by her own labor what mercy from heaven t

50 http://www.gutenberg.net/Hugo/LesMs/50.html
chapter ix madame victurniens success so the monks widow was good for something but m madeleine had heard nothing of all this life is full of just such combinations of events m madeleine was in the ha

51 http://www.gutenberg.net/Hugo/LesMs/51.html
chapter x result of the success she had been dismissed towards the end of the winter the summer passed but winter came again short days less work winter no warmth no light no noonday the evening joini

52 http://www.gutenberg.net/Hugo/LesMs/52.html
chapter xi christus nos liberavit what is this history of fantine it is society purchasing a slave from whom from misery from hunger cold isolation destitution a dolorous bargain a soul for a morsel o

53 http://www.gutenberg.net/Hugo/LesMs/53.html
chapter xii m bamataboiss inactivity there is in all small towns and there was at m sur m in particular a class of young men who nibble away an income of fifteen hundred francs with the same air with 

54 http://www.gutenberg.net/Hugo/LesMs/54.html
chapter xiii the solution of some questions connected with the municipal police javert thrust aside the spectators broke the circle and set out with long strides towards the police station which is si

55 http://www.gutenberg.net/Hugo/LesMs/55.html
chapter i the beginning of repose m madeleine had fantine removed to that infirmary which he had established in his own house he confided her to the sisters who put her to bed a burning fever had come

56 http://www.gutenberg.net/Hugo/LesMs/56.html
chapter ii how jean may become champ one morning m madeleine was in his study occupied in arranging in advance some pressing matters connected with the mayors office in case he should decide to take t

57 http://www.gutenberg.net/Hugo/LesMs/57.html
chapter i sister simplice the incidents the reader is about to peruse were not all known at m sur m but the small portion of them which became known left such a memory in that town that a serious gap 

58 http://www.gutenberg.net/Hugo/LesMs/58.html
chapter ii the perspicacity of master scaufflaire from the town hall he betook himself to the extremity of the town to a fleming named master scaufflaer french scaufflaire who let out horses and cabri

59 http://www.gutenberg.net/Hugo/LesMs/59.html
chapter iii a tempest in a skull the reader has no doubt already divined that m madeleine is no other than jean valjean we have already gazed into the depths of this conscience the moment has now come

60 http://www.gutenberg.net/Hugo/LesMs/60.html
chapter iv forms assumed by suffering during sleep three oclock in the morning had just struck and he had been walking thus for five hours almost uninterruptedly when he at length allowed himself to d

61 http://www.gutenberg.net/Hugo/LesMs/61.html
chapter v hindrances the posting service from arras to m sur m was still operated at this period by small mail wagons of the time of the empire these mail wagons were two wheeled cabriolets upholstere

62 http://www.gutenberg.net/Hugo/LesMs/62.html
chapter vi sister simplice put to the proof but at that moment fantine was joyous she had passed a very bad night her cough was frightful her fever had doubled in intensity she had had dreams in the m

63 http://www.gutenberg.net/Hugo/LesMs/63.html
chapter vii the traveller on his arrival takes precautions for departure it was nearly eight oclock in the evening when the cart which we left on the road entered the porte cochere of the hotel de la 

64 http://www.gutenberg.net/Hugo/LesMs/64.html
chapter viii an entrance by favor although he did not suspect the fact the mayor of m sur m enjoyed a sort of celebrity for the space of seven years his reputation for virtue had filled the whole of b

65 http://www.gutenberg.net/Hugo/LesMs/65.html
chapter ix a place where convictions are in process of formation he advanced a pace closed the door mechanically behind him and remained standing contemplating what he saw it was a vast and badly ligh

66 http://www.gutenberg.net/Hugo/LesMs/66.html
chapter x the system of denials the moment for closing the debate had arrived the president had the accused stand up and addressed to him the customary question have you anything to add to your defenc

67 http://www.gutenberg.net/Hugo/LesMs/67.html
chapter xi champmathieu more and more astonished it was he in fact the clerks lamp illumined his countenance he held his hat in his hand there was no disorder in his clothing his coat was carefully bu

68 http://www.gutenberg.net/Hugo/LesMs/68.html
chapter i in what mirror m madeleine contemplates his hair the day had begun to dawn fantine had passed a sleepless and feverish night filled with happy visions at daybreak she fell asleep sister simp

69 http://www.gutenberg.net/Hugo/LesMs/69.html
chapter ii fantine happy she made no movement of either surprise or of joy she was joy itself that simple question and cosette was put with so profound a faith with so much certainty with such a compl

70 http://www.gutenberg.net/Hugo/LesMs/70.html
chapter iii javert satisfied this is what had taken place the half hour after midnight had just struck when m madeleine quitted the hall of assizes in arras he regained his inn just in time to set out

71 http://www.gutenberg.net/Hugo/LesMs/71.html
chapter iv authority reasserts its rights fantine had not seen javert since the day on which the mayor had torn her from the man her ailing brain comprehended nothing but the only thing which she did 

72 http://www.gutenberg.net/Hugo/LesMs/72.html
chapter v a suitable tomb javert deposited jean valjean in the city prison the arrest of m madeleine occasioned a sensation or rather an extraordinary commotion in m sur m we are sorry that we cannot 

73 http://www.gutenberg.net/Hugo/LesMs/73.html
chapter i what is met with on the way from nivelles last year 1861 on a beautiful may morning a traveller the person who is telling this story was coming from nivelles and directing his course towards

74 http://www.gutenberg.net/Hugo/LesMs/74.html
chapter ii hougomont hougomont this was a funereal spot the beginning of the obstacle the first resistance which that great wood cutter of europe called napoleon encountered at waterloo the first knot

75 http://www.gutenberg.net/Hugo/LesMs/75.html
chapter iii the eighteenth of june 1815 let us turn back that is one of the story tellers rights and put ourselves once more in the year 1815 and even a little earlier than the epoch when the action n

76 http://www.gutenberg.net/Hugo/LesMs/76.html
chapter iv a those persons who wish to gain a clear idea of the battle of waterloo have only to place mentally on the ground a capital a the left limb of the a is the road to nivelles the right limb i

77 http://www.gutenberg.net/Hugo/LesMs/77.html
chapter v the quid obscurum of battles every one is acquainted with the first phase of this battle a beginning which was troubled uncertain hesitating menacing to both armies but still more so for the

78 http://www.gutenberg.net/Hugo/LesMs/78.html
chapter vi four oclock in the afternoon towards four oclock the condition of the english army was serious the prince of orange was in command of the centre hill of the right wing picton of the left wi

79 http://www.gutenberg.net/Hugo/LesMs/79.html
chapter vii napoleon in a good humor the emperor though ill and discommoded on horseback by a local trouble had never been in a better humor than on that day his impenetrability had been smiling ever 

80 http://www.gutenberg.net/Hugo/LesMs/80.html
chapter viii the emperor puts a question to the guide lacoste so on the morning of waterloo napoleon was content he was right the plan of battle conceived by him was as we have seen really admirable t

81 http://www.gutenberg.net/Hugo/LesMs/81.html
chapter ix the unexpected there were three thousand five hundred of them they formed a front a quarter of a league in extent they were giant men on colossal horses there were six and twenty squadrons 

82 http://www.gutenberg.net/Hugo/LesMs/82.html
chapter x the plateau of mont saint jean the battery was unmasked at the same moment with the ravine sixty cannons and the thirteen squares darted lightning point blank on the cuirassiers the intrepid

83 http://www.gutenberg.net/Hugo/LesMs/83.html
chapter xi a bad guide to napoleon a good guide to bulow the painful surprise of napoleon is well known grouchy hoped for blucher arriving death instead of life fate has these turns the throne of the 

84 http://www.gutenberg.net/Hugo/LesMs/84.html
chapter xii the guard every one knows the rest the irruption of a third army the battle broken to pieces eighty six months of fire thundering simultaneously pirch the first coming up with bulow zieten

85 http://www.gutenberg.net/Hugo/LesMs/85.html
chapter xiii the catastrophe the rout behind the guard was melancholy the army yielded suddenly on all sides at once hougomont la haie sainte papelotte plancenoit the cry treachery was followed by a c

86 http://www.gutenberg.net/Hugo/LesMs/86.html
chapter xiv the last square several squares of the guard motionless amid this stream of the defeat as rocks in running water held their own until night night came death also they awaited that double s

87 http://www.gutenberg.net/Hugo/LesMs/87.html
chapter xv cambronne if any french reader object to having his susceptibilities offended one would have to refrain from repeating in his presence what is perhaps the finest reply that a frenchman ever

88 http://www.gutenberg.net/Hugo/LesMs/88.html
chapter xvi quot libras in duce the battle of waterloo is an enigma it is as obscure to those who won it as to those who lost it for napoleon it was a panic 10 blucher sees nothing in it but fire well

89 http://www.gutenberg.net/Hugo/LesMs/89.html
chapter xvii is waterloo to be considered good there exists a very respectable liberal school which does not hate waterloo we do not belong to it to us waterloo is but the stupefied date of liberty th

90 http://www.gutenberg.net/Hugo/LesMs/90.html
chapter xviii a recrudescence of divine right end of the dictatorship a whole european system crumbled away the empire sank into a gloom which resembled that of the roman world as it expired again we 

91 http://www.gutenberg.net/Hugo/LesMs/91.html
chapter xix the battle field at night let us return it is a necessity in this book to that fatal battle field on the 18th of june the moon was full its light favored bluchers ferocious pursuit betraye

92 http://www.gutenberg.net/Hugo/LesMs/92.html
chapter i number 24 601 becomes number 9 430 jean valjean had been recaptured the reader will be grateful to us if we pass rapidly over the sad details we will confine ourselves to transcribing two pa

93 http://www.gutenberg.net/Hugo/LesMs/93.html
chapter ii in which the reader will peruse two verses which are of the devils composition possibly before proceeding further it will be to the purpose to narrate in some detail a singular occurrence w

94 http://www.gutenberg.net/Hugo/LesMs/94.html
chapter iii the ankle chain must have undergone a certain preparatory manipulation to be thus broken with a blow from a hammer towards the end of october in that same year 1823 the inhabitants of toul

95 http://www.gutenberg.net/Hugo/LesMs/95.html
chapter i the water question at montfermeil montfermeil is situated between livry and chelles on the southern edge of that lofty table land which separates the ourcq from the marne at the present day 

96 http://www.gutenberg.net/Hugo/LesMs/96.html
chapter ii two complete portraits so far in this book the thenardiers have been viewed only in profile the moment has arrived for making the circuit of this couple and considering it under all its asp

97 http://www.gutenberg.net/Hugo/LesMs/97.html
chapter iii men must have wine and horses must have water four new travellers had arrived cosette was meditating sadly for although she was only eight years old she had already suffered so much that s

98 http://www.gutenberg.net/Hugo/LesMs/98.html
chapter iv entrance on the scene of a doll the line of open air booths starting at the church extended as the reader will remember as far as the hostelry of the thenardiers these booths were all illum

99 http://www.gutenberg.net/Hugo/LesMs/99.html
chapter v the little one all alone as the thenardier hostelry was in that part of the village which is near the church it was to the spring in the forest in the direction of chelles that cosette was o

100 http://www.gutenberg.net/Hugo/LesMs/100.html
chapter vi which possibly proves boulatruelles intelligence on the afternoon of that same christmas day 1823 a man had walked for rather a long time in the most deserted part of the boulevard de lhopi

101 http://www.gutenberg.net/Hugo/LesMs/101.html
chapter vii cosette side by side with the stranger in the dark cosette as we have said was not frightened the man accosted her he spoke in a voice that was grave and almost bass my child what you are 

102 http://www.gutenberg.net/Hugo/LesMs/102.html
chapter viii the unpleasantness of receiving into ones house a poor man who may be a rich man cosette could not refrain from casting a sidelong glance at the big doll which was still displayed at the 

103 http://www.gutenberg.net/Hugo/LesMs/103.html
chapter ix thenardier and his manoeuvres on the following morning two hours at least before day break thenardier seated beside a candle in the public room of the tavern pen in hand was making out the 

104 http://www.gutenberg.net/Hugo/LesMs/104.html
chapter x he who seeks to better himself may render his situation worse madame thenardier had allowed her husband to have his own way as was her wont she had expected great results when the man and co

105 http://www.gutenberg.net/Hugo/LesMs/105.html
chapter xi number 9 430 reappears and cosette wins it in the lottery jean valjean was not dead when he fell into the sea or rather when he threw himself into it he was not ironed as we have seen he sw

106 http://www.gutenberg.net/Hugo/LesMs/106.html
chapter i master gorbeau forty years ago a rambler who had ventured into that unknown country of the salpetriere and who had mounted to the barriere ditalie by way of the boulevard reached a point whe

107 http://www.gutenberg.net/Hugo/LesMs/107.html
chapter ii a nest for owl and a warbler it was in front of this gorbeau house that jean valjean halted like wild birds he had chosen this desert place to construct his nest he fumbled in his waistcoat

108 http://www.gutenberg.net/Hugo/LesMs/108.html
chapter iii two misfortunes make one piece of good fortune on the following morning at daybreak jean valjean was still by cosettes bedside he watched there motionless waiting for her to wake some new 

109 http://www.gutenberg.net/Hugo/LesMs/109.html
chapter iv the remarks of the principal tenant jean valjean was prudent enough never to go out by day every evening at twilight he walked for an hour or two sometimes alone often with cosette seeking 

110 http://www.gutenberg.net/Hugo/LesMs/110.html
chapter v a five franc piece falls on the ground and produces a tumult near saint medards church there was a poor man who was in the habit of crouching on the brink of a public well which had been con

111 http://www.gutenberg.net/Hugo/LesMs/111.html
chapter i the zigzags of strategy an observation here becomes necessary in view of the pages which the reader is about to peruse and of others which will be met with further on the author of this book

112 http://www.gutenberg.net/Hugo/LesMs/112.html
chapter ii it is lucky that the pont dausterlitz bears carriages uncertainty was at an end for jean valjean fortunately it still lasted for the men he took advantage of their hesitation it was time lo

113 http://www.gutenberg.net/Hugo/LesMs/113.html
chapter iii to wit the plan of paris in 1727 three hundred paces further on he arrived at a point where the street forked it separated into two streets which ran in a slanting line one to the right an

114 http://www.gutenberg.net/Hugo/LesMs/114.html
chapter iv the gropings of flight in order to understand what follows it is requisite to form an exact idea of the droit mur lane and in particular of the angle which one leaves on the left when one e

115 http://www.gutenberg.net/Hugo/LesMs/115.html
chapter v which would be impossible with gas lanterns at that moment a heavy and measured sound began to be audible at some distance jean valjean risked a glance round the corner of the street seven o

116 http://www.gutenberg.net/Hugo/LesMs/116.html
chapter vi the beginning of an enigma jean valjean found himself in a sort of garden which was very vast and of singular aspect one of those melancholy gardens which seem made to be looked at in winte

117 http://www.gutenberg.net/Hugo/LesMs/117.html
chapter vii continuation of the enigma the night wind had risen which indicated that it must be between one and two oclock in the morning poor cosette said nothing as she had seated herself beside him

118 http://www.gutenberg.net/Hugo/LesMs/118.html
chapter viii the enigma becomes doubly mysterious the child had laid her head on a stone and fallen asleep he sat down beside her and began to think little by little as he gazed at her he grew calm an

119 http://www.gutenberg.net/Hugo/LesMs/119.html
chapter ix the man with the bell he walked straight up to the man whom he saw in the garden he had taken in his hand the roll of silver which was in the pocket of his waistcoat the mans head was bent 

120 http://www.gutenberg.net/Hugo/LesMs/120.html
chapter x which explains how javert got on the scent the events of which we have just beheld the reverse side so to speak had come about in the simplest possible manner when jean valjean on the evenin

121 http://www.gutenberg.net/Hugo/LesMs/121.html
chapter i number 62 rue petit picpus nothing half a century ago more resembled every other carriage gate than the carriage gate of number 62 rue petit picpus this entrance which usually stood ajar in 

122 http://www.gutenberg.net/Hugo/LesMs/122.html
chapter ii the obedience of martin verga this convent which in 1824 had already existed for many a long year in the rue petit picpus was a community of bernardines of the obedience of martin verga the

123 http://www.gutenberg.net/Hugo/LesMs/123.html
chapter iii austerities one is a postulant for two years at least often for four a novice for four it is rare that the definitive vows can be pronounced earlier than the age of twenty three or twenty 

124 http://www.gutenberg.net/Hugo/LesMs/124.html
chapter iv gayeties none the less these young girls filled this grave house with charming souvenirs at certain hours childhood sparkled in that cloister the recreation hour struck a door swung on its 

125 http://www.gutenberg.net/Hugo/LesMs/125.html
chapter v distractions above the door of the refectory this prayer which was called the white paternoster and which possessed the property of bearing people straight to paradise was inscribed in large

126 http://www.gutenberg.net/Hugo/LesMs/126.html
chapter vi the little convent in this enclosure of the petit picpus there were three perfectly distinct buildings the great convent inhabited by the nuns the boarding school where the scholars were lo

127 http://www.gutenberg.net/Hugo/LesMs/127.html
chapter vii some silhouettes of this darkness during the six years which separate 1819 from 1825 the prioress of the petit picpus was mademoiselle de blemeur whose name in religion was mother innocent

128 http://www.gutenberg.net/Hugo/LesMs/128.html
chapter viii post corda lapides after having sketched its moral face it will not prove unprofitable to point out in a few words its material configuration the reader already has some idea of it the co

129 http://www.gutenberg.net/Hugo/LesMs/129.html
chapter ix a century under a guimpe since we are engaged in giving details as to what the convent of the petit picpus was in former times and since we have ventured to open a window on that discreet r

130 http://www.gutenberg.net/Hugo/LesMs/130.html
chapter x origin of the perpetual adoration however this almost sepulchral parlor of which we have sought to convey an idea is a purely local trait which is not reproduced with the same severity in ot

131 http://www.gutenberg.net/Hugo/LesMs/131.html
chapter xi end of the petit picpus at the beginning of the restoration the convent of the petit picpus was in its decay this forms a part of the general death of the order which after the eighteenth c

132 http://www.gutenberg.net/Hugo/LesMs/132.html
chapter i the convent as an abstract idea this book is a drama whose leading personage is the infinite man is the second such being the case and a convent having happened to be on our road it has been

133 http://www.gutenberg.net/Hugo/LesMs/133.html
chapter ii the convent as an historical fact from the point of view of history of reason and of truth monasticism is condemned monasteries when they abound in a nation are clogs in its circulation cum

134 http://www.gutenberg.net/Hugo/LesMs/134.html
chapter iii on what conditions one can respect the past monasticism such as it existed in spain and such as it still exists in thibet is a sort of phthisis for civilization it stops life short it simp

135 http://www.gutenberg.net/Hugo/LesMs/135.html
chapter iv the convent from the point of view of principles men unite themselves and dwell in communities by virtue of what right by virtue of the right of association they shut themselves up at home 

136 http://www.gutenberg.net/Hugo/LesMs/136.html
chapter v prayer they pray to whom to god to pray to god what is the meaning of these words is there an infinite beyond us is that infinite there inherent permanent necessarily substantial since it is

137 http://www.gutenberg.net/Hugo/LesMs/137.html
chapter vi the absolute goodness of prayer with regard to the modes of prayer all are good provided that they are sincere turn your book upside down and be in the infinite there is as we know a philos

138 http://www.gutenberg.net/Hugo/LesMs/138.html
chapter vii precautions to be observed in blame history and philosophy have eternal duties which are at the same time simple duties to combat caiphas the high priest draco the lawgiver trimalcion the 

139 http://www.gutenberg.net/Hugo/LesMs/139.html
chapter viii faith law a few words more we blame the church when she is saturated with intrigues we despise the spiritual which is harsh toward the temporal but we everywhere honor the thoughtful man 

140 http://www.gutenberg.net/Hugo/LesMs/140.html
chapter i which treats of the manner of entering a convent it was into this house that jean valjean had as fauchelevent expressed it fallen from the sky he had scaled the wall of the garden which form

141 http://www.gutenberg.net/Hugo/LesMs/141.html
chapter ii fauchelevent in the presence of a difficulty it is the peculiarity of certain persons and certain professions notably priests and nuns to wear a grave and agitated air on critical occasions

142 http://www.gutenberg.net/Hugo/LesMs/142.html
chapter iii mother innocente about a quarter of an hour elapsed the prioress returned and seated herself once more on her chair the two interlocutors seemed preoccupied we will present a stenographic 

143 http://www.gutenberg.net/Hugo/LesMs/143.html
chapter iv in which jean valjean has quite the air of having read austin castillejo the strides of a lame man are like the ogling glances of a one eyed man they do not reach their goal very promptly m

144 http://www.gutenberg.net/Hugo/LesMs/144.html
chapter v it is not necessary to be drunk in order to be immortal on the following day as the sun was declining the very rare passers by on the boulevard du maine pulled off their hats to an old fashi

145 http://www.gutenberg.net/Hugo/LesMs/145.html
chapter vi between four planks who was in the coffin the reader knows jean valjean jean valjean had arranged things so that he could exist there and he could almost breathe it is a strange thing to wh

146 http://www.gutenberg.net/Hugo/LesMs/146.html
chapter vii in which will be found the origin of the saying dont lose the card this is what had taken place above the coffin in which lay jean valjean when the hearse had driven off when the priest an

147 http://www.gutenberg.net/Hugo/LesMs/147.html
chapter viii a successful interrogatory an hour later in the darkness of night two men and a child presented themselves at no 62 rue petit picpus the elder of the men lifted the knocker and rapped the

148 http://www.gutenberg.net/Hugo/LesMs/148.html
chapter ix cloistered cosette continued to hold her tongue in the convent it was quite natural that cosette should think herself jean valjeans daughter moreover as she knew nothing she could say nothi

149 http://www.gutenberg.net/Hugo/LesMs/149.html
chapter i parvulus paris has a child and the forest has a bird the bird is called the sparrow the child is called the gamin couple these two ideas which contain the one all the furnace the other all t

150 http://www.gutenberg.net/Hugo/LesMs/150.html
chapter ii some of his particular characteristics the gamin the street arab of paris is the dwarf of the giant let us not exaggerate this cherub of the gutter sometimes has a shirt but in that case he

151 http://www.gutenberg.net/Hugo/LesMs/151.html
chapter iii he is agreeable in the evening thanks to a few sous which he always finds means to procure the homuncio enters a theatre on crossing that magic threshold he becomes transfigured he was the

152 http://www.gutenberg.net/Hugo/LesMs/152.html
chapter iv he may be of use paris begins with the lounger and ends with the street arab two beings of which no other city is capable the passive acceptance which contents itself with gazing and the in

153 http://www.gutenberg.net/Hugo/LesMs/153.html
chapter v his frontiers the gamin loves the city he also loves solitude since he has something of the sage in him urbis amator like fuscus ruris amator like flaccus to roam thoughtfully about that is 

154 http://www.gutenberg.net/Hugo/LesMs/154.html
chapter vi a bit of history at the epoch nearly contemporary by the way when the action of this book takes place there was not as there is to day a policeman at the corner of every street a benefit wh

155 http://www.gutenberg.net/Hugo/LesMs/155.html
chapter vii the gamin should have his place in the classifications of india the body of street arabs in paris almost constitutes a caste one might almost say not every one who wishes to belong to it c

156 http://www.gutenberg.net/Hugo/LesMs/156.html
chapter viii in which the reader will find a charming saying of the last king in summer he metamorphoses himself into a frog and in the evening when night is falling in front of the bridges of austerl

157 http://www.gutenberg.net/Hugo/LesMs/157.html
chapter ix the old soul of gaul there was something of that boy in poquelin the son of the fish market beaumarchais had something of it gaminerie is a shade of the gallic spirit mingled with good sens

158 http://www.gutenberg.net/Hugo/LesMs/158.html
chapter x ecce paris ecce homo to sum it all up once more the paris gamin of to day like the graeculus of rome in days gone by is the infant populace with the wrinkle of the old world on his brow the 

159 http://www.gutenberg.net/Hugo/LesMs/159.html
chapter xi to scoff to reign there is no limit to paris no city has had that domination which sometimes derides those whom it subjugates to please you o athenians exclaimed alexander paris makes more 

160 http://www.gutenberg.net/Hugo/LesMs/160.html
chapter xii the future latent in the people as for the parisian populace even when a man grown it is always the street arab to paint the child is to paint the city and it is for that reason that we ha

161 http://www.gutenberg.net/Hugo/LesMs/161.html
chapter xiii little gavroche eight or nine years after the events narrated in the second part of this story people noticed on the boulevard du temple and in the regions of the chateau deau a little bo

162 http://www.gutenberg.net/Hugo/LesMs/162.html
chapter i ninety years and thirty two teeth in the rue boucherat rue de normandie and the rue de saintonge there still exist a few ancient inhabitants who have preserved the memory of a worthy man nam

163 http://www.gutenberg.net/Hugo/LesMs/163.html
chapter ii like master like house he lived in the marais rue des filles du calvaire no 6 he owned the house this house has since been demolished and rebuilt and the number has probably been changed in

164 http://www.gutenberg.net/Hugo/LesMs/164.html
chapter iii luc esprit at the age of sixteen one evening at the opera he had had the honor to be stared at through opera glasses by two beauties at the same time ripe and celebrated beauties then and 

165 http://www.gutenberg.net/Hugo/LesMs/165.html
chapter iv a centenarian aspirant he had taken prizes in his boyhood at the college of moulins where he was born and he had been crowned by the hand of the duc de nivernais whom he called the duc de n

166 http://www.gutenberg.net/Hugo/LesMs/166.html
chapter v basque and nicolette he had theories here is one of them when a man is passionately fond of women and when he has himself a wife for whom he cares but little who is homely cross legitimate w

167 http://www.gutenberg.net/Hugo/LesMs/167.html
chapter vi in which magnon and her two children are seen with m gillenormand sorrow was converted into wrath he was furious at being in despair he had all sorts of prejudices and took all sorts of lib

168 http://www.gutenberg.net/Hugo/LesMs/168.html
chapter vii rule receive no one except in the evening such was m luc esprit gillenormand who had not lost his hair which was gray rather than white and which was always dressed in dogs ears to sum up 

169 http://www.gutenberg.net/Hugo/LesMs/169.html
chapter viii two do not make a pair we have just spoken of m gillenormands two daughters they had come into the world ten years apart in their youth they had borne very little resemblance to each othe

170 http://www.gutenberg.net/Hugo/LesMs/170.html
chapter i an ancient salon when m gillenormand lived in the rue servandoni he had frequented many very good and very aristocratic salons although a bourgeois m gillenormand was received in society as 

171 http://www.gutenberg.net/Hugo/LesMs/171.html
chapter ii one of the red spectres of that epoch any one who had chanced to pass through the little town of vernon at this epoch and who had happened to walk across that fine monumental bridge which w

172 http://www.gutenberg.net/Hugo/LesMs/172.html
chapter iii requiescant madame de t s salon was all that marius pontmercy knew of the world it was the only opening through which he could get a glimpse of life this opening was sombre and more cold t

173 http://www.gutenberg.net/Hugo/LesMs/173.html
chapter iv end of the brigand the conclusion of marius classical studies coincided with m gillenormands departure from society the old man bade farewell to the faubourg saint germain and to madame de 

174 http://www.gutenberg.net/Hugo/LesMs/174.html
chapter v the utility of going to mass in order to become a revolutionist marius had preserved the religious habits of his childhood one sunday when he went to hear mass at saint sulpice at that same 

175 http://www.gutenberg.net/Hugo/LesMs/175.html
chapter vi the consequences of having met a warden where it was that marius went will be disclosed a little further on marius was absent for three days then he returned to paris went straight to the l

176 http://www.gutenberg.net/Hugo/LesMs/176.html
chapter vii some petticoat we have mentioned a lancer he was a great grand nephew of m gillenormand on the paternal side who led a garrison life outside the family and far from the domestic hearth lie

177 http://www.gutenberg.net/Hugo/LesMs/177.html
chapter viii marble against granite it was hither that marius had come on the first occasion of his absenting himself from paris it was hither that he had come every time that m gillenormand had said 

178 http://www.gutenberg.net/Hugo/LesMs/178.html
chapter i a group which barely missed becoming historic at that epoch which was to all appearances indifferent a certain revolutionary quiver was vaguely current breaths which had started forth from t

179 http://www.gutenberg.net/Hugo/LesMs/179.html
chapter ii blondeaus funeral oration by bossuet on a certain afternoon which had as will be seen hereafter some coincidence with the events heretofore related laigle de meaux was to be seen leaning in

180 http://www.gutenberg.net/Hugo/LesMs/180.html
chapter iii marius astonishments in a few days marius had become courfeyracs friend youth is the season for prompt welding and the rapid healing of scars marius breathed freely in courfeyracs society 

181 http://www.gutenberg.net/Hugo/LesMs/181.html
chapter iv the back room of the cafe musain one of the conversations among the young men at which marius was present and in which he sometimes joined was a veritable shock to his mind this took place 

182 http://www.gutenberg.net/Hugo/LesMs/182.html
chapter v enlargement of horizon the shocks of youthful minds among themselves have this admirable property that one can never foresee the spark nor divine the lightning flash what will dart out prese

183 http://www.gutenberg.net/Hugo/LesMs/183.html
chapter vi res angusta that evening left marius profoundly shaken and with a melancholy shadow in his soul he felt what the earth may possibly feel at the moment when it is torn open with the iron in 

184 http://www.gutenberg.net/Hugo/LesMs/184.html
chapter i marius indigent life became hard for marius it was nothing to eat his clothes and his watch he ate of that terrible inexpressible thing that is called de la vache enrage that is to say he en

185 http://www.gutenberg.net/Hugo/LesMs/185.html
chapter ii marius poor it is the same with wretchedness as with everything else it ends by becoming bearable it finally assumes a form and adjusts itself one vegetates that is to say one develops in a

186 http://www.gutenberg.net/Hugo/LesMs/186.html
chapter iii marius grown up at this epoch marius was twenty years of age it was three years since he had left his grandfather both parties had remained on the same terms without attempting to approach

187 http://www.gutenberg.net/Hugo/LesMs/187.html
chapter iv m mabeuf on the day when m mabeuf said to marius certainly i approve of political opinions he expressed the real state of his mind all political opinions were matters of indifference to him

188 http://www.gutenberg.net/Hugo/LesMs/188.html
chapter v poverty a good neighbor for misery marius liked this candid old man who saw himself gradually falling into the clutches of indigence and who came to feel astonishment little by little withou

189 http://www.gutenberg.net/Hugo/LesMs/189.html
chapter vi the substitute it chanced that the regiment to which lieutenant theodule belonged came to perform garrison duty in paris this inspired aunt gillenormand with a second idea she had on the fi

190 http://www.gutenberg.net/Hugo/LesMs/190.html
chapter i the sobriquet mode of formation of family names marius was at this epoch a handsome young man of medium stature with thick and intensely black hair a lofty and intelligent brow well opened a

191 http://www.gutenberg.net/Hugo/LesMs/191.html
chapter ii lux facta est during the second year precisely at the point in this history which the reader has now reached it chanced that this habit of the luxembourg was interrupted without marius hims

192 http://www.gutenberg.net/Hugo/LesMs/192.html
chapter iii effect of the spring one day the air was warm the luxembourg was inundated with light and shade the sky was as pure as though the angels had washed it that morning the sparrows were giving

193 http://www.gutenberg.net/Hugo/LesMs/193.html
chapter iv beginning of a great malady on the following day at the accustomed hour marius drew from his wardrobe his new coat his new trousers his new hat and his new boots he clothed himself in this 

194 http://www.gutenberg.net/Hugo/LesMs/194.html
chapter v divrs claps of thunder fall on maam bougon on the following day maam bougon as courfeyrac styled the old portress principal tenant housekeeper of the gorbeau hovel maam bougon whose name was

195 http://www.gutenberg.net/Hugo/LesMs/195.html
chapter vi taken prisoner on one of the last days of the second week marius was seated on his bench as usual holding in his hand an open book of which he had not turned a page for the last two hours a

196 http://www.gutenberg.net/Hugo/LesMs/196.html
chapter vii adventures of the letter u delivered over to conjectures isolation detachment from everything pride independence the taste of nature the absence of daily and material activity the life wit

197 http://www.gutenberg.net/Hugo/LesMs/197.html
chapter viii the veterans themselves can be happy since we have pronounced the word modesty and since we conceal nothing we ought to say that once nevertheless in spite of his ecstasies his ursule cau

198 http://www.gutenberg.net/Hugo/LesMs/198.html
chapter ix eclipse the reader has just seen how marius discovered or thought that he discovered that she was named ursule appetite grows with loving to know that her name was ursule was a great deal i

199 http://www.gutenberg.net/Hugo/LesMs/199.html
chapter i mines and miners human societies all have what is called in theatrical parlance a third lower floor the social soil is everywhere undermined sometimes for good sometimes for evil these works

200 http://www.gutenberg.net/Hugo/LesMs/200.html
chapter ii the lowest depths there disinterestedness vanishes the demon is vaguely outlined each one is for himself the i in the eyes howls seeks fumbles and gnaws the social ugolino is in this gulf t

201 http://www.gutenberg.net/Hugo/LesMs/201.html
chapter iii babet gueulemer claquesous and montparnasse a quartette of ruffians claquesous gueulemer babet and montparnasse governed the third lower floor of paris from 1830 to 1835 gueulemer was a he

202 http://www.gutenberg.net/Hugo/LesMs/202.html
chapter iv composition of the troupe these four ruffians formed a sort of proteus winding like a serpent among the police and striving to escape vidocqs indiscreet glances under divers forms tree flam

203 http://www.gutenberg.net/Hugo/LesMs/203.html
chapter i marius while seeking a girl in a bonnet encounters a man in a cap summer passed then the autumn winter came neither m leblanc nor the young girl had again set foot in the luxembourg garden t

204 http://www.gutenberg.net/Hugo/LesMs/204.html
chapter ii treasure trove marius had not left the gorbeau house he paid no attention to any one there at that epoch to tell the truth there were no other inhabitants in the house except himself and th

205 http://www.gutenberg.net/Hugo/LesMs/205.html
chapter iii quadrifrons that evening as he was undressing preparatory to going to bed his hand came in contact in the pocket of his coat with the packet which he had picked up on the boulevard he had 

206 http://www.gutenberg.net/Hugo/LesMs/206.html
chapter iv a rose in misery a very young girl was standing in the half open door the dormer window of the garret through which the light fell was precisely opposite the door and illuminated the figure

207 http://www.gutenberg.net/Hugo/LesMs/207.html
chapter v a providential peep hole marius had lived for five years in poverty in destitution even in distress but he now perceived that he had not known real misery true misery he had but just had a v

208 http://www.gutenberg.net/Hugo/LesMs/208.html
chapter vi the wild man in his lair cities like forests have their caverns in which all the most wicked and formidable creatures which they contain conceal themselves only in cities that which thus co

209 http://www.gutenberg.net/Hugo/LesMs/209.html
chapter vii strategy and tactics marius with a load upon his breast was on the point of descending from the species of observatory which he had improvised when a sound attracted his attention and caus

210 http://www.gutenberg.net/Hugo/LesMs/210.html
chapter viii the ray of light in the hovel the big girl approached and laid her hand in her fathers feel how cold i am said she bah replied the father i am much colder than that the mother exclaimed i

211 http://www.gutenberg.net/Hugo/LesMs/211.html
chapter ix jondrette comes near weeping the hovel was so dark that people coming from without felt on entering it the effect produced on entering a cellar the two new comers advanced therefore with a 

212 http://www.gutenberg.net/Hugo/LesMs/212.html
chapter x tariff of licensed cabs two francs an hour marius had lost nothing of this entire scene and yet in reality had seen nothing his eyes had remained fixed on the young girl his heart had so to 

213 http://www.gutenberg.net/Hugo/LesMs/213.html
chapter xi offers of service from misery to wretchedness marius ascended the stairs of the hovel with slow steps at the moment when he was about to re enter his cell he caught sight of the elder jondr

214 http://www.gutenberg.net/Hugo/LesMs/214.html
chapter xii the use made of m leblancs five franc piece nothing in the aspect of the family was altered except that the wife and daughters had levied on the package and put on woollen stockings and ja

215 http://www.gutenberg.net/Hugo/LesMs/215.html
chapter xiii solus cum solo in loco remoto non cogitabuntur orare pater noster marius dreamer as he was was as we have said firm and energetic by nature his habits of solitary meditation while they ha

216 http://www.gutenberg.net/Hugo/LesMs/216.html
chapter xiv in which a police agent bestows two fistfuls on a lawyer on arriving at no 14 rue de pontoise he ascended to the first floor and inquired for the commissary of police the commissary of pol

217 http://www.gutenberg.net/Hugo/LesMs/217.html
chapter xv jondrette makes his purchases a few moments later about three oclock courfeyrac chanced to be passing along the rue mouffetard in company with bossuet the snow had redoubled in violence and

218 http://www.gutenberg.net/Hugo/LesMs/218.html
chapter xvi in which will be found the words to an english air which was in fashion in 1832 marius seated himself on his bed it might have been half past five oclock only half an hour separated him fr

219 http://www.gutenberg.net/Hugo/LesMs/219.html
chapter xvii the use made of marius five franc piece marius decided that the moment had now arrived when he must resume his post at his observatory in a twinkling and with the agility of his age he ha

220 http://www.gutenberg.net/Hugo/LesMs/220.html
chapter xviii marius two chairs form a vis a vis suddenly the distant and melancholy vibration of a clock shook the panes six oclock was striking from saint medard jondrette marked off each stroke wit

221 http://www.gutenberg.net/Hugo/LesMs/221.html
chapter xix occupying ones self with obscure depths hardly was m leblanc seated when he turned his eyes towards the pallets which were empty how is the poor little wounded girl he inquired bad replied

222 http://www.gutenberg.net/Hugo/LesMs/222.html
chapter xx the trap the door of the garret had just opened abruptly and allowed a view of three men clad in blue linen blouses and masked with masks of black paper the first was thin and had a long ir

223 http://www.gutenberg.net/Hugo/LesMs/223.html
chapter xxi one should always begin by arresting the victims at nightfall javert had posted his men and had gone into ambush himself between the trees of the rue de la barrieredes gobelins which faced

224 http://www.gutenberg.net/Hugo/LesMs/224.html
chapter xxii the little one who was crying in volume two on the day following that on which these events took place in the house on the boulevard de lhopital a child who seemed to be coming from the d

225 http://www.gutenberg.net/Hugo/LesMs/225.html
chapter i well cut 1831 and 1832 the two years which are immediately connected with the revolution of july form one of the most peculiar and striking moments of history these two years rise like two m

226 http://www.gutenberg.net/Hugo/LesMs/226.html
chapter ii badly sewed but the task of sages is one thing the task of clever men is another the revolution of 1830 came to a sudden halt as soon as a revolution has made the coast the skilful make has

227 http://www.gutenberg.net/Hugo/LesMs/227.html
chapter iii louis philippe revolutions have a terrible arm and a happy hand they strike firmly and choose well even incomplete even debased and abused and reduced to the state of a junior revolution l

228 http://www.gutenberg.net/Hugo/LesMs/228.html
chapter iv cracks beneath the foundation at the moment when the drama which we are narrating is on the point of penetrating into the depths of one of the tragic clouds which envelop the beginning of l

229 http://www.gutenberg.net/Hugo/LesMs/229.html
chapter v facts whence history springs and which history ignores towards the end of april everything had become aggravated the fermentation entered the boiling state ever since 1830 petty partial revo

230 http://www.gutenberg.net/Hugo/LesMs/230.html
chapter vi enjolras and his lieutenants it was about this epoch that enjolras in view of a possible catastrophe instituted a kind of mysterious census all were present at a secret meeting at the cafe 

231 http://www.gutenberg.net/Hugo/LesMs/231.html
chapter i the larks meadow marius had witnessed the unexpected termination of the ambush upon whose track he had set javert but javert had no sooner quitted the building bearing off his prisoners in t

232 http://www.gutenberg.net/Hugo/LesMs/232.html
chapter ii embryonic formation of crimes in the incubation of prisons javerts triumph in the gorbeau hovel seemed complete but had not been so in the first place and this constituted the principal anx

233 http://www.gutenberg.net/Hugo/LesMs/233.html
chapter iii apparition to father mabeuf marius no longer went to see any one but he sometimes encountered father mabeuf by chance while marius was slowly descending those melancholy steps which may be

234 http://www.gutenberg.net/Hugo/LesMs/234.html
chapter iv an apparition to marius some days after this visit of a spirit to farmer mabeuf one morning it was on a monday the day when marius borrowed the hundred sou piece from courfeyrac for thenard

235 http://www.gutenberg.net/Hugo/LesMs/235.html
chapter i the house with a secret about the middle of the last century a chief justice in the parliament of paris having a mistress and concealing the fact for at that period the grand seignors displa

236 http://www.gutenberg.net/Hugo/LesMs/236.html
chapter ii jean valjean as a national guard however properly speaking he lived in the rue plumet and he had arranged his existence there in the following fashion cosette and the servant occupied the p

237 http://www.gutenberg.net/Hugo/LesMs/237.html
chapter iii foliis ac frondibus the garden thus left to itself for more than half a century had become extraordinary and charming the passers by of forty years ago halted to gaze at it without a suspi

238 http://www.gutenberg.net/Hugo/LesMs/238.html
chapter iv change of gate it seemed that this garden created in olden days to conceal wanton mysteries had been transformed and become fitted to shelter chaste mysteries there were no longer either ar

239 http://www.gutenberg.net/Hugo/LesMs/239.html
chapter v the rose perceives that it is an engine of war one day cosette chanced to look at herself in her mirror and she said to herself really it seemed to her almost that she was pretty this threw 

240 http://www.gutenberg.net/Hugo/LesMs/240.html
chapter vi the battle begun cosette in her shadow like marius in his was all ready to take fire destiny with its mysterious and fatal patience slowly drew together these two beings all charged and all

241 http://www.gutenberg.net/Hugo/LesMs/241.html
chapter vii to one sadness oppose a sadness and a half all situations have their instincts old and eternal mother nature warned jean valjean in a dim way of the presence of marius jean valjean shudder

242 http://www.gutenberg.net/Hugo/LesMs/242.html
chapter viii the chain gang jean valjean was the more unhappy of the two youth even in its sorrows always possesses its own peculiar radiance at times jean valjean suffered so greatly that he became p

243 http://www.gutenberg.net/Hugo/LesMs/243.html
chapter i a wound without healing within thus their life clouded over by degrees but one diversion which had formerly been a happiness remained to them which was to carry bread to those who were hungr

244 http://www.gutenberg.net/Hugo/LesMs/244.html
chapter ii mother plutarque finds no difficulty in explaining a phenomenon one evening little gavroche had had nothing to eat he remembered that he had not dined on the preceding day either this was b

245 http://www.gutenberg.net/Hugo/LesMs/245.html
chapter i solitude and the barracks combined cosettes grief which had been so poignant and lively four or five months previously had without her being conscious of the fact entered upon its convalesce

246 http://www.gutenberg.net/Hugo/LesMs/246.html
chapter ii cosettes apprehensions during the first fortnight in april jean valjean took a journey this as the reader knows happened from time to time at very long intervals he remained absent a day or

247 http://www.gutenberg.net/Hugo/LesMs/247.html
chapter iii enriched with commentaries by toussaint in the garden near the railing on the street there was a stone bench screened from the eyes of the curious by a plantation of yoke elms but which co

248 http://www.gutenberg.net/Hugo/LesMs/248.html
chapter iv a heart beneath a stone the reduction of the universe to a single being the expansion of a single being even to god that is love love is the salutation of the angels to the stars how sad is

249 http://www.gutenberg.net/Hugo/LesMs/249.html
chapter v cosette after the letter as cosette read she gradually fell into thought at the very moment when she raised her eyes from the last line of the note book the handsome officer passed triumphan

250 http://www.gutenberg.net/Hugo/LesMs/250.html
chapter vi old people are made to go out opportunely when evening came jean valjean went out cosette dressed herself she arranged her hair in the most becoming manner and she put on a dress whose bodi

251 http://www.gutenberg.net/Hugo/LesMs/251.html
chapter i the malicious playfulness of the wind since 1823 when the tavern of montfermeil was on the way to shipwreck and was being gradually engulfed not in the abyss of a bankruptcy but in the cessp

252 http://www.gutenberg.net/Hugo/LesMs/252.html
chapter ii in which little gavroche extracts profit from napoleon the great spring in paris is often traversed by harsh and piercing breezes which do not precisely chill but freeze one these north win

253 http://www.gutenberg.net/Hugo/LesMs/253.html
chapter iii the vicissitudes of flight this is what had taken place that same night at the la force an escape had been planned between babet brujon guelemer and thenardier although thenardier was in c

254 http://www.gutenberg.net/Hugo/LesMs/254.html
chapter i origin pigritia is a terrible word it engenders a whole world la pegre for which read theft and a hell la pegrenne for which read hunger thus idleness is the mother she has a son theft and a

255 http://www.gutenberg.net/Hugo/LesMs/255.html
chapter ii roots slang is the tongue of those who sit in darkness thought is moved in its most sombre depths social philosophy is bidden to its most poignant meditations in the presence of that enigma

256 http://www.gutenberg.net/Hugo/LesMs/256.html
chapter iii slang which weeps and slang which laughs as the reader perceives slang in its entirety slang of four hundred years ago like the slang of to day is permeated with that sombre symbolical spi

257 http://www.gutenberg.net/Hugo/LesMs/257.html
chapter iv the two duties to watch and to hope this being the case is all social danger dispelled certainly not there is no jacquerie society may rest assured on that point blood will no longer rush t

258 http://www.gutenberg.net/Hugo/LesMs/258.html
chapter i full light the reader has probably understood that eponine having recognized through the gate the inhabitant of that rue plumet whither magnon had sent her had begun by keeping the ruffians 

259 http://www.gutenberg.net/Hugo/LesMs/259.html
chapter ii the bewilderment of perfect happiness they existed vaguely frightened at their happiness they did not notice the cholera which decimated paris precisely during that very month they had conf

260 http://www.gutenberg.net/Hugo/LesMs/260.html
chapter iii the beginning of shadow jean valjean suspected nothing cosette who was rather less dreamy than marius was gay and that sufficed for jean valjeans happiness the thoughts which cosette cheri

261 http://www.gutenberg.net/Hugo/LesMs/261.html
chapter iv a cab runs in english and barks in slang the following day was the 3d of june 1832 a date which it is necessary to indicate on account of the grave events which at that epoch hung on the ho

262 http://www.gutenberg.net/Hugo/LesMs/262.html
chapter v things of the night after the departure of the ruffians the rue plumet resumed its tranquil nocturnal aspect that which had just taken place in this street would not have astonished a forest

263 http://www.gutenberg.net/Hugo/LesMs/263.html
chapter vi marius becomes practical once more to the extent of giving cosette his address while this sort of a dog with a human face was mounting guard over the gate and while the six ruffians were yi

264 http://www.gutenberg.net/Hugo/LesMs/264.html
chapter vii the old heart and the young heart in the presence of each other at that epoch father gillenormand was well past his ninety first birthday he still lived with mademoiselle gillenormand in t

265 http://www.gutenberg.net/Hugo/LesMs/265.html
chapter i jean valjean that same day towards four oclock in the afternoon jean valjean was sitting alone on the back side of one of the most solitary slopes in the champ de mars either from prudence o

266 http://www.gutenberg.net/Hugo/LesMs/266.html
chapter ii marius marius had left m gillenormand in despair he had entered the house with very little hope and quitted it with immense despair however and those who have observed the depths of the hum

267 http://www.gutenberg.net/Hugo/LesMs/267.html
chapter iii m mabeuf jean valjeans purse was of no use to m mabeuf m mabeuf in his venerable infantile austerity had not accepted the gift of the stars he had not admitted that a star could coin itsel

268 http://www.gutenberg.net/Hugo/LesMs/268.html
chapter i the surface of the question of what is revolt composed of nothing and of everything of an electricity disengaged little by little of a flame suddenly darting forth of a wandering force of a 

269 http://www.gutenberg.net/Hugo/LesMs/269.html
chapter ii the root of the matter there is such a thing as an uprising and there is such a thing as insurrection these are two separate phases of wrath one is in the wrong the other is in the right in

270 http://www.gutenberg.net/Hugo/LesMs/270.html
chapter iii a burial an occasion to be born again in the spring of 1832 although the cholera had been chilling all minds for the last three months and had cast over their agitation an indescribable an

271 http://www.gutenberg.net/Hugo/LesMs/271.html
chapter iv the ebullitions of former days nothing is more extraordinary than the first breaking out of a riot everything bursts forth everywhere at once was it foreseen yes was it prepared no whence c

272 http://www.gutenberg.net/Hugo/LesMs/272.html
chapter v originality of paris during the last two years as we have said paris had witnessed more than one insurrection nothing is generally more singularly calm than the physiognomy of paris during a

273 http://www.gutenberg.net/Hugo/LesMs/273.html
chapter i some explanations with regard to the origin of gavroches poetry the influence of an academician on this poetry at the instant when the insurrection arising from the shock of the populace and

274 http://www.gutenberg.net/Hugo/LesMs/274.html
chapter ii gavroche on the march the brandishing of a triggerless pistol grasped in ones hand in the open street is so much of a public function that gavroche felt his fervor increasing with every mom

275 http://www.gutenberg.net/Hugo/LesMs/275.html
chapter iii just indignation of a hair dresser the worthy hair dresser who had chased from his shop the two little fellows to whom gavroche had opened the paternal interior of the elephant was at that

276 http://www.gutenberg.net/Hugo/LesMs/276.html
chapter iv the child is amazed at the old man in the meantime in the marche saint jean where the post had already been disarmed gavroche had just effected a junction with a band led by enjolras courfe

277 http://www.gutenberg.net/Hugo/LesMs/277.html
chapter v the old man let us recount what had taken place enjolras and his friends had been on the boulevard bourdon near the public storehouses at the moment when the dragoons had made their charge e

278 http://www.gutenberg.net/Hugo/LesMs/278.html
chapter vi recruits the band augmented every moment near the rue des billettes a man of lofty stature whose hair was turning gray and whose bold and daring mien was remarked by courfeyrac enjolras and

279 http://www.gutenberg.net/Hugo/LesMs/279.html
chapter i history of corinthe from its foundation the parisians who nowadays on entering on the rue rambuteau at the end near the halles notice on their right opposite the rue mondetour a basket maker

280 http://www.gutenberg.net/Hugo/LesMs/280.html
chapter ii preliminary gayeties laigle de meaux as the reader knows lived more with joly than elsewhere he had a lodging as a bird has one on a branch the two friends lived together ate together slept

281 http://www.gutenberg.net/Hugo/LesMs/281.html
chapter iii night begins to descend upon grantaire the spot was in fact admirably adapted the entrance to the street widened out the other extremity narrowed together into a pocket without exit corint

282 http://www.gutenberg.net/Hugo/LesMs/282.html
chapter iv an attempt to console the widow hucheloup bahorel in ecstasies over the barricade shouted heres the street in its low necked dress how well it looks courfeyrac as he demolished the wine sho

283 http://www.gutenberg.net/Hugo/LesMs/283.html
chapter v preparations the journals of the day which said that that nearly impregnable structure of the barricade of the rue de la chanvrerie as they call it reached to the level of the first floor we

284 http://www.gutenberg.net/Hugo/LesMs/284.html
chapter vi waiting during those hours of waiting what did they do we must needs tell since this is a matter of history while the men made bullets and the women lint while a large saucepan of melted br

285 http://www.gutenberg.net/Hugo/LesMs/285.html
chapter vii the man recruited in the rue des billettes night was fully come nothing made its appearance all that they heard was confused noises and at intervals fusillades but these were rare badly su

286 http://www.gutenberg.net/Hugo/LesMs/286.html
chapter viii many interrogation points with regard to a certain le cabuc whose name may not have been le cabuc the tragic picture which we have undertaken would not be complete the reader would not se

287 http://www.gutenberg.net/Hugo/LesMs/287.html
chapter i from the rue plumet to the quartier saint denis the voice which had summoned marius through the twilight to the barricade of the rue de la chanvrerie had produced on him the effect of the vo

288 http://www.gutenberg.net/Hugo/LesMs/288.html
chapter ii an owls view of paris a being who could have hovered over paris that night with the wing of the bat or the owl would have had beneath his eyes a gloomy spectacle all that old quarter of the

289 http://www.gutenberg.net/Hugo/LesMs/289.html
chapter iii the extreme edge marius had reached the halles there everything was still calmer more obscure and more motionless than in the neighboring streets one would have said that the glacial peace

290 http://www.gutenberg.net/Hugo/LesMs/290.html
chapter i the flag act first as yet nothing had come ten oclock had sounded from saint merry enjolras and combeferre had gone and seated themselves carbines in hand near the outlet of the grand barric

291 http://www.gutenberg.net/Hugo/LesMs/291.html
chapter ii the flag act second since they had arrived at corinthe and had begun the construction of the barricade no attention had been paid to father mabeuf m mabeuf had not quitted the mob however h

292 http://www.gutenberg.net/Hugo/LesMs/292.html
chapter iii gavroche would have done better to accept enjolras carbine they threw a long black shawl of widow hucheloups over father mabeuf six men made a litter of their guns on this they laid the bo

293 http://www.gutenberg.net/Hugo/LesMs/293.html
chapter iv the barrel of powder marius still concealed in the turn of the rue mondetour had witnessed shuddering and irresolute the first phase of the combat but he had not long been able to resist th

294 http://www.gutenberg.net/Hugo/LesMs/294.html
chapter v end of the verses of jean prouvaire all flocked around marius courfeyrac flung himself on his neck here you are what luck said combeferre you came in opportunely ejaculated bossuet if it had

295 http://www.gutenberg.net/Hugo/LesMs/295.html
chapter vi the agony of death after the agony of life a peculiarity of this species of war is that the attack of the barricades is almost always made from the front and that the assailants generally a

296 http://www.gutenberg.net/Hugo/LesMs/296.html
chapter vii gavroche as a profound calculator of distances marius kept his promise he dropped a kiss on that livid brow where the icy perspiration stood in beads this was no infidelity to cosette it w

297 http://www.gutenberg.net/Hugo/LesMs/297.html
chapter i a drinker is a babbler what are the convulsions of a city in comparison with the insurrections of the soul man is a depth still greater than the people jean valjean at that very moment was t

298 http://www.gutenberg.net/Hugo/LesMs/298.html
chapter ii the street urchin an enemy of light how long did he remain thus what was the ebb and flow of this tragic meditation did he straighten up did he remain bowed had he been bent to breaking cou

299 http://www.gutenberg.net/Hugo/LesMs/299.html
chapter iii while cosette and toussaint are asleep jean valjean went into the house with marius letter he groped his way up the stairs as pleased with the darkness as an owl who grips his prey opened 

300 http://www.gutenberg.net/Hugo/LesMs/300.html
chapter iv gavroches excess of zeal in the meantime gavroche had had an adventure gavroche after having conscientiously stoned the lantern in the rue du chaume entered the rue des vielles haudriettes 

301 http://www.gutenberg.net/Hugo/LesMs/301.html
chapter i the charybdis of the faubourg saint antoine and the scylla of the faubourg du temple the two most memorable barricades which the observer of social maladies can name do not belong to the per

302 http://www.gutenberg.net/Hugo/LesMs/302.html
chapter ii what is to be done in the abyss if one does not converse sixteen years count in the subterranean education of insurrection and june 1848 knew a great deal more about it than june 1832 so th

303 http://www.gutenberg.net/Hugo/LesMs/303.html
chapter iii light and shadow enjolras had been to make a reconnaissance he had made his way out through mondetour lane gliding along close to the houses the insurgents we will remark were full of hope

304 http://www.gutenberg.net/Hugo/LesMs/304.html
chapter iv minus five plus one after the man who decreed the protest of corpses had spoken and had given this formula of their common soul there issued from all mouths a strangely satisfied and terrib

305 http://www.gutenberg.net/Hugo/LesMs/305.html
chapter v the horizon which one beholds from the summit of a barricade the situation of all in that fatal hour and that pitiless place had as result and culminating point enjolras supreme melancholy e

306 http://www.gutenberg.net/Hugo/LesMs/306.html
chapter vi marius haggard javert laconic let us narrate what was passing in marius thoughts let the reader recall the state of his soul we have just recalled it everything was a vision to him now his 

307 http://www.gutenberg.net/Hugo/LesMs/307.html
chapter vii the situation becomes aggravated the daylight was increasing rapidly not a window was opened not a door stood ajar it was the dawn but not the awaking the end of the rue de la chanvrerie o

308 http://www.gutenberg.net/Hugo/LesMs/308.html
chapter viii the artillery men compel people to take them seriously thet flocked round gavroche but he had no time to tell anything marius drew him aside with a shudder what are you doing here hullo s

309 http://www.gutenberg.net/Hugo/LesMs/309.html
chapter ix employment of the old talents of a poacher and that infallible marksmanship which influenced the condemnation of 1796 opinions were exchanged in the barricade the firing from the gun was ab

310 http://www.gutenberg.net/Hugo/LesMs/310.html
chapter x dawn at that moment cosette awoke her chamber was narrow neat unobtrusive with a long sash window facing the east on the back court yard of the house cosette knew nothing of what was going o

311 http://www.gutenberg.net/Hugo/LesMs/311.html
chapter xi the shot which misses nothing and kills no one the assailants fire continued musketry and grape shot alternated but without committing great ravages to tell the truth the top alone of the c

312 http://www.gutenberg.net/Hugo/LesMs/312.html
chapter xii disorder a partisan of order bossuet muttered in combeferres ear he did not answer my question he is a man who does good by gun shots said combeferre those who have preserved some memory o

313 http://www.gutenberg.net/Hugo/LesMs/313.html
chapter xiii passing gleams in the chaos of sentiments and passions which defend a barricade there is a little of everything there is bravery there is youth honor enthusiasm the ideal conviction the r

314 http://www.gutenberg.net/Hugo/LesMs/314.html
chapter xiv wherein will appear the name of enjolras mistress courfeyrac seated on a paving stone beside enjolras continued to insult the cannon and each time that that gloomy cloud of projectiles whi

315 http://www.gutenberg.net/Hugo/LesMs/315.html
chapter xv gavroche outside courfeyrac suddenly caught sight of some one at the base of the barricade outside in the street amid the bullets gavroche had taken a bottle basket from the wine shop had m

316 http://www.gutenberg.net/Hugo/LesMs/316.html
chapter xvi how from a brother one becomes a father at that same moment in the garden of the luxembourg for the gaze of the drama must be everywhere present two children were holding each other by the

317 http://www.gutenberg.net/Hugo/LesMs/317.html
chapter xvii mortuus pater filium moriturum expectat marius dashed out of the barricade combeferre followed him but he was too late gavroche was dead combeferre brought back the basket of cartridges m

318 http://www.gutenberg.net/Hugo/LesMs/318.html
chapter xviii the vulture become prey we must insist upon one psychological fact peculiar to barricades nothing which is characteristic of that surprising war of the streets should be omitted whatever

319 http://www.gutenberg.net/Hugo/LesMs/319.html
chapter xix jean valjean takes his revenge when jean valjean was left alone with javert he untied the rope which fastened the prisoner across the middle of the body and the knot of which was under the

320 http://www.gutenberg.net/Hugo/LesMs/320.html
chapter xx the dead are in the right and the living are not in the wrong the death agony of the barricade was about to begin everything contributed to its tragic majesty at that supreme moment a thous

321 http://www.gutenberg.net/Hugo/LesMs/321.html
chapter xxi the heroes all at once the drum beat the charge the attack was a hurricane on the evening before in the darkness the barricade had been approached silently as by a boa now in broad dayligh

322 http://www.gutenberg.net/Hugo/LesMs/322.html
chapter xxii foot to foot when there were no longer any of the leaders left alive except enjolras and marius at the two extremities of the barricade the centre which had so long sustained courfeyrac j

323 http://www.gutenberg.net/Hugo/LesMs/323.html
chapter xxiii orestes fasting and pylades drunk at length by dint of mounting on each others backs aiding themselves with the skeleton of the staircase climbing up the walls clinging to the ceiling sl

324 http://www.gutenberg.net/Hugo/LesMs/324.html
chapter xxiv prisoner marius was in fact a prisoner the hand which had seized him from behind and whose grasp he had felt at the moment of his fall and his loss of consciousness was that of jean valje

325 http://www.gutenberg.net/Hugo/LesMs/325.html
chapter i the land impoverished by the sea paris casts twenty five millions yearly into the water and this without metaphor how and in what manner day and night with what object with no object with wh

326 http://www.gutenberg.net/Hugo/LesMs/326.html
chapter ii ancient history of the sewer let the reader imagine paris lifted off like a cover the subterranean net work of sewers from a birds eye view will outline on the banks a species of large bran

327 http://www.gutenberg.net/Hugo/LesMs/327.html
chapter iii bruneseau the sewer of paris in the middle ages was legendary in the sixteenth century henri ii attempted a bore which failed not a hundred years ago the cess pool mercier attests the fact

328 http://www.gutenberg.net/Hugo/LesMs/328.html
chapter iv the visit took place it was a formidable campaign a nocturnal battle against pestilence and suffocation it was at the same time a voyage of discovery one of the survivors of this expedition

329 http://www.gutenberg.net/Hugo/LesMs/329.html
chapter v present progress to day the sewer is clean cold straight correct it almost realizes the ideal of what is understood in england by the word respectable it is proper and grayish laid out by ru

330 http://www.gutenberg.net/Hugo/LesMs/330.html
chapter vi future progress the excavation of the sewer of paris has been no slight task the last ten centuries have toiled at it without being able to bring it to a termination any more than they have

331 http://www.gutenberg.net/Hugo/LesMs/331.html
chapter i the sewer and its surprises it was in the sewers of paris that jean valjean found himself still another resemblance between paris and the sea as in the ocean the diver may disappear there th

332 http://www.gutenberg.net/Hugo/LesMs/332.html
chapter ii explanation on the day of the sixth of june a battue of the sewers had been ordered it was feared that the vanquished might have taken to them for refuge and prefect gisquet was to search o

333 http://www.gutenberg.net/Hugo/LesMs/333.html
chapter iii the spun man this justice must be rendered to the police of that period that even in the most serious public junctures it imperturbably fulfilled its duties connected with the sewers and s

334 http://www.gutenberg.net/Hugo/LesMs/334.html
chapter iv he also bears his cross jean valjean had resumed his march and had not again paused this march became more and more laborious the level of these vaults varies the average height is about fi

335 http://www.gutenberg.net/Hugo/LesMs/335.html
chapter v in the case of sand as in that of woman there is a fineness which is treacherous he felt that he was entering the water and that he no longer had a pavement under his feet but only mud it so

336 http://www.gutenberg.net/Hugo/LesMs/336.html
chapter vi the fontis jean valjean found himself in the presence of a fontis this sort of quagmire was common at that period in the subsoil of the champs elysees difficult to handle in the hydraulic w

337 http://www.gutenberg.net/Hugo/LesMs/337.html
chapter vii one sometimes runs aground when one fancies that one is disembarking he set out on his way once more however although he had not left his life in the fontis he seemed to have left his stre

338 http://www.gutenberg.net/Hugo/LesMs/338.html
chapter viii the torn coat tail in the midst of this prostration a hand was laid on his shoulder and a low voice said to him half shares some person in that gloom nothing so closely resembles a dream 

339 http://www.gutenberg.net/Hugo/LesMs/339.html
chapter ix marius produces on some one who is a judge of the matter the effect of being dead he allowed marius to slide down upon the shore they were in the open air the miasmas darkness horror lay be

340 http://www.gutenberg.net/Hugo/LesMs/340.html
chapter x return of the son who was prodigal of his life at every jolt over the pavement a drop of blood trickled from marius hair night had fully closed in when the carriage arrived at no 6 rue des f

341 http://www.gutenberg.net/Hugo/LesMs/341.html
chapter xi concussion in the absolute they did not open their lips again during the whole space of their ride what did jean valjean want to finish what he had begun to warn cosette to tell her where m

342 http://www.gutenberg.net/Hugo/LesMs/342.html
chapter xii the grandfather basque and the porter had carried marius into the drawing room as he still lay stretched out motionless on the sofa upon which he had been placed on his arrival the doctor 

343 http://www.gutenberg.net/Hugo/LesMs/343.html
chapter i javert passed slowly down the rue de lhomme arme he walked with drooping head for the first time in his life and likewise for the first time in his life with his hands behind his back up to 

344 http://www.gutenberg.net/Hugo/LesMs/344.html
chapter i in which the tree with the zinc plaster appears again some time after the events which we have just recorded sieur boulatruelle experienced a lively emotion sieur boulatruelle was that road 

345 http://www.gutenberg.net/Hugo/LesMs/345.html
chapter ii marius emerging from civil war makes ready for domestic war for a long time marius was neither dead nor alive for many weeks he lay in a fever accompanied by delirium and by tolerably grave

346 http://www.gutenberg.net/Hugo/LesMs/346.html
chapter iii marius attacked one day m gillenormand while his daughter was putting in order the phials and cups on the marble of the commode bent over marius and said to him in his tenderest accents lo

347 http://www.gutenberg.net/Hugo/LesMs/347.html
chapter iv mademoiselle gillenormand ends by no longer thinking it a bad thing that m fauchelevent should have entered with something under his arm cosette and marius beheld each other once more what 

348 http://www.gutenberg.net/Hugo/LesMs/348.html
chapter v deposit your money in a forest rather than with a notary the reader has no doubt understood without necessitating a lengthy explanation that jean valjean after the champmathieu affair had be

349 http://www.gutenberg.net/Hugo/LesMs/349.html
chapter vi the two old men do everything each one after his own fashion to render cosette happy everything was made ready for the wedding the doctor on being consulted declared that it might take plac

350 http://www.gutenberg.net/Hugo/LesMs/350.html
chapter vii the effects of dreams mingled with happiness the lovers saw each other every day cosette came with m fauchelevent this is reversing things said mademoiselle gillenormand to have the bride 

351 http://www.gutenberg.net/Hugo/LesMs/351.html
chapter viii two men impossible to find marius enchantment great as it was could not efface from his mind other pre occupations while the wedding was in preparation and while awaiting the date fixed u

352 http://www.gutenberg.net/Hugo/LesMs/352.html
chapter i the 16th of february 1833 the night of the 16th to the 17th of february 1833 was a blessed night above its shadows heaven stood open it was the wedding night of marius and cosette the day ha

353 http://www.gutenberg.net/Hugo/LesMs/353.html
chapter ii jean valjean still wears his arm in a sling to realize ones dream to whom is this accorded there must be elections for this in heaven we are all candidates unknown to ourselves the angels v

354 http://www.gutenberg.net/Hugo/LesMs/354.html
chapter iii the inseparable what had become of jean valjean immediately after having laughed at cosettes graceful command when no one was paying any heed to him jean valjean had risen and had gained t

355 http://www.gutenberg.net/Hugo/LesMs/355.html
chapter iv the immortal liver 68 68 in allusion to the story of prometheus the old and formidable struggle of which we have already witnessed so many phases began once more jacob struggled with the an

356 http://www.gutenberg.net/Hugo/LesMs/356.html
chapter i the seventh circle and the eighth heaven the days that follow weddings are solitary people respect the meditations of the happy pair and also their tardy slumbers to some degree the tumult o

357 http://www.gutenberg.net/Hugo/LesMs/357.html
chapter ii the obscurities which a revelation can contain marius was quite upset the sort of estrangement which he had always felt towards the man beside whom he had seen cosette was now explained to 

358 http://www.gutenberg.net/Hugo/LesMs/358.html
chapter i the lower chamber on the following day at nightfall jean valjean knocked at the carriage gate of the gillenormand house it was basque who received him basque was in the courtyard at the appo

359 http://www.gutenberg.net/Hugo/LesMs/359.html
chapter ii another step backwards on the following day at the same hour jean valjean came cosette asked him no questions was no longer astonished no longer exclaimed that she was cold no longer spoke 

360 http://www.gutenberg.net/Hugo/LesMs/360.html
chapter iii they recall the garden of the rue plumet this was the last time after that last flash of light complete extinction ensued no more familiarity no more good morning with a kiss never more th

361 http://www.gutenberg.net/Hugo/LesMs/361.html
chapter iv attraction and extinction during the last months of spring and the first months of summer in 1833 the rare passersby in the marais the petty shopkeepers the loungers on thresholds noticed a

362 http://www.gutenberg.net/Hugo/LesMs/362.html
chapter i pity for the unhappy but indulgence for the happy it is a terrible thing to be happy how content one is how all sufficient one finds it how being in possession of the false object of life ha

363 http://www.gutenberg.net/Hugo/LesMs/363.html
chapter ii last flickerings of a lamp without oil one day jean valjean descended his staircase took three steps in the street seated himself on a post on that same stone post where gavroche had found 

364 http://www.gutenberg.net/Hugo/LesMs/364.html
chapter iii a pen is heavy to the man who lifted the fauchelevents cart one evening jean valjean found difficulty in raising himself on his elbow he felt of his wrist and could not find his pulse his 

365 http://www.gutenberg.net/Hugo/LesMs/365.html
chapter iv a bottle of ink which only succeeded in whitening that same day or to speak more accurately that same evening as marius left the table and was on the point of withdrawing to his study havin

366 http://www.gutenberg.net/Hugo/LesMs/366.html
chapter v a night behind which there is day jean valjean turned round at the knock which he heard on his door come in he said feebly the door opened cosette and marius made their appearance cosette ru

367 http://www.gutenberg.net/Hugo/LesMs/367.html
chapter vi the grass covers and the rain effaces in the cemetery of pere lachaise in the vicinity of the common grave far from the elegant quarter of that city of sepulchres far from all the tombs of 

